Loosen the meaning of status in API conventions (#5842)
kubernetes/community: contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md

or otherwise changed after creation by other ecosystem components (e.g.,
schedulers, auto-scalers), and is persisted in stable storage with the API
object. If the specification is deleted, the object will be purged from the
system.

The status summarizes the current state of the object in the system, and
is usually persisted with the object by automated processes but may be

> generated on the fly.  As a rule of thumb, fields in status are the most recent

Reviewer: Small suggestion here:
```suggestion
generated on the fly.  As a general guideline, fields in status are the most recent
```
Because:
- idioms are less clear for non-native speakers
- this particular one has a contentious history of being perceived as problematic.

Because the history is contentious, I don't know if it's actually a problem, but easier to just skip the whole thing and use a clearer, non-idiomatic term.

Author: I did not know the history.  Thanks.  People suck. :)  Will change it.

Reviewer 2: Damn! thanks for pointing this out @youngnick

or otherwise changed after creation by other ecosystem components (e.g.,
schedulers, auto-scalers), and is persisted in stable storage with the API
object. If the specification is deleted, the object will be purged from the
system.

The status summarizes the current state of the object in the system, and is
usually persisted with the object by automated processes but may be generated
on the fly.  As a general guideline, fields in status should be the most recent
observations of actual state, but they may contain information such as the
results of allocations or similar operations which are executed in response to
the object's spec.  See [below](#representing-allocated-values) for more
details.

> Types with spec and status stanzas have distinct authorization scopes for them.

Reviewer 3: Maybe "can have"? Since at least for custom resources, the user of the status subresource is optional.

Reviewer: I'd suggest "should have" because even for CRDs it's a good idea. :)

This allows users to be granted full write access to spec and read-only access
to status, while relevant controllers are granted read-only access to spec but

> full write access to status.

Reviewer: I don't have an improvement here, I just think this is really clear. :)

or otherwise changed after creation by other ecosystem components (e.g.,
schedulers, auto-scalers), and is persisted in stable storage with the API
object. If the specification is deleted, the object will be purged from the
system.

The status summarizes the current state of the object in the system, and is
usually persisted with the object by automated processes but may be generated

> on the fly.  As a general guideline, fields in status should be the most recent
> observations of actual state, but they may contain information such as the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
on the fly.  As a general guideline, fields in the status should be the most recent
observations of actual state, but they may contain information such as the
```
Or maybe:
```suggestion
on the fly.  As a general guideline, fields in the status stanza should be the most recent
observations of actual state, but they may contain information such as the
```
Oh, but then in the next paragraph, you use "spec" and "status" with no preceding article. Later in the document you distinguish the words as `spec` and `status`. Quoting or distinguishing their typeface would help here.

Author: I feel like field names should be backticked, but we don't have a consistent convention on that.   I'll add a commit to do that and see if it is better.

* When specifying numeric ranges, use inclusive ranges when possible.

## Representing Allocated Values

Many API types include values that are allocated on behalf of the user from
some larger space (e.g. IP addresses from a pool, or storage bucket names).
These allocations are usually driven by controllers asynchronously to the
user's API operations.  Sometimes the user can request a specific value and the
controller must confirm or reject that request.  There are many examples of
this, and there a handful of patterns used to represent it.

The common theme among all of these is that the system cannot trust users
with some fields, and must verify or otherwise confirm such requests before
consumers can use them.

Some examples:

* Service `clusterIP`: Users may request a specific IP in `spec` or will be
  allocated one (in the same `spec` field).  If a specific IP is requested, the
  apiserver will ensure that IP is available or else will reject the API
  operation synchronously (rare).  Consumers get the result from `spec`.  This
  is safe because the value is either valid or it is never stored.
* Service `loadBalancerIP`: Users may request a specific IP in `spec` or will

>   be allocated one which is reported in `status.  If a specific IP is

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
  be allocated one which is reported in `status`.  If a specific IP is
```

* the allocated value is always or almost always needed (i.e. most instances of
  this type will have a value)
* the schema and controller are known a priori (i.e. it's not an extension)
* the access-control needs allow for controllers to be able to write to
  `status`

Consumers of such values can look at the `status` field for the correct value.

### When to use a different type

Storing allocated values in a different type is more complicated but also more
flexible.  This is most appropriate when:

* the allocated value is optional (i.e. many instances of this type will not
  have a value at all)
* the schema and controller are not known a priori (i.e. it's an extension)
* the schema is sufficiently complicated (i.e. it doesn't make sense to burden
  the main type with it)
* access-control for this type demands finer granularity than "all of status"

When using this pattern, you must account for lifecycle of the allocated
objects (who cleans them up and when) as well as the "linkage" between them and
the main type (often using the same-name or an object-ref field or a selector).

There will always be some cases which could follow either paths, and these will

> need human evaluation to decide,

Reviewer: Nit: Was this meant to be a period, or was there something else?

PersistentVolumes might have been simpler if we had done this.

### When to use a `status` field

Storing such values in `status` is the easiest and most straight-forward
pattern.  This is approproate when:

* the allocated value is highly coupled to the rest of the object (e.g. pod
  resource allocations)
* the allocated value is always or almost always needed (i.e. most instances of
  this type will have a value)
* the schema and controller are known a priori (i.e. it's not an extension)
* the access-control needs allow for controllers to be able to write to
  `status`

Consumers of such values can look at the `status` field for the "final" value.

### When to use a different type

Storing allocated values in a different type is more complicated but also more
flexible.  This is most appropriate when:

* the allocated value is optional (i.e. many instances of this type will not
  have a value at all)
* the schema and controller are not known a priori (i.e. it's an extension)
* the schema is sufficiently complicated (i.e. it doesn't make sense to burden
  the main type with it)
* access-control for this type demands finer granularity than "all of status"

> When using this pattern, you must account for lifecycle of the allocated

Reviewer: I think I get what we're saying here, but some examples like above would be really useful. Is the Service/Endpoint/EndpointSlice relationship a possible example?

represent them in case of the service is of type `NodePort` or `ClusterIP` (`discriminator` values). 
These resources and the fields representing them are automatically cleared when  the users changes 
service type to `ExternalName` where these resources and field values no longer apply. 	

## Representing Allocated Values

Many API types include values that are allocated on behalf of the user from
some larger space (e.g. IP addresses from a range, or storage bucket names).
These allocations are usually driven by controllers asynchronously to the
user's API operations.  Sometimes the user can request a specific value and a
controller must confirm or reject that request.  There are many examples of
this in Kubernetes, and there a handful of patterns used to represent it.

The common theme among all of these is that the system should not trust users
with such fields, and must verify or otherwise confirm such requests before
using them.

Some examples:

* Service `clusterIP`: Users may request a specific IP in `spec` or will be
  allocated one (in the same `spec` field).  If a specific IP is requested, the

>   apiserver will ensure that IP is available or else will reject the API
>   operation synchronously (rare).  Consumers read the result from `spec`.  This

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  apiserver will either confirm that IP is available or, failing that, reject the API
  operation synchronously (rare).  Consumers read the result from `spec`.  This
```

Author: ACK

  is safe because the value is either valid or it is never stored.
* Service `loadBalancerIP`: Users may request a specific IP in `spec` or will
  be allocated one which is reported in `status`.  If a specific IP is

>   requested, the LB controller will ensure that IP is available or else will
>   report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result from `status`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  requested, the LB controller will either ensure that IP is available or 
  report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result from `status`.
```

Author: ACK

  This is safe because most users do not have acces to write to `status`.
* PersistentVolumeClaims: Users may request a specific PersistentVolume in
  `spec` or will be allocated one (in the same `spec` field).  If a specific PV

>   is requested, the volume controller will ensure that the volume is available
>   or else will report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result by

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  is requested, the volume controller will either ensure that the volume is available
  or report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result by
```

Author: ACK

  examining both the PVC and the PV.  This is more complicated than the others

>   because the spec value is stored before being confirmed, which could lead to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  because the `spec` value is stored before being confirmed, which could lead to
```

Author: ACK

  a user accessing someone else's PV.

A counter-example:

* Service `externalIPs`: Users must specify one or more specific IPs in `spec`.
  The system cannot easily verify those IPs (by their definition, they are
  external). Consumers read the result from `spec`.  This is UNSAFE and has
  caused problems with untrusted users.

In the past, API conventions dictated that `status` fields always come from
observation, which made some of these cases more complicated than necessary.
The conventions have been updated to allow `status` to hold such allocated
values.  This is not a one-size-fits-all solution, though.

> ### When to use a `spec` field

Reviewer 5: Is this "when to use a `spec` field to report allocated values"?

Presumably, `spec` is still used to _request_ values in all cases.

Author: Of course.

This header is nested under "Representing Allocated Values" - is that sufficient IYO?

> ### When to use a `spec` field
> 
> New APIs should almost never do this.  Instead, they should use `status`.
> PersistentVolumes might have been simpler if we had done this.

Reviewer 5: It seems strange to have an API recommendation of "when to _X_" that says "never do _X_".

I think it's reasonable to suggest that controllers should always use `status` for this reporting, but maybe we don't need a "when to use a `spec` field" section given the historical context above?

```suggestion
New APIs should almost never use `spec` fields to report allocated values.  Instead, they should use `status`.
PersistentVolumes might have been simpler if we had done this.
```

Author: I did it this way because it answered an actual design pattern I saw in the wild - (ab)using spec. I thought it makes the point string by saying "When should I X?  Almost never."  I liked the cheekiness.

I'll change it if reviewers agree, but my inclination is to leave it

### When to use a `status` field

Storing such values in `status` is the easiest and most straight-forward

> pattern.  This is approproate when:

Reviewer 2: typo - `appropriate`

Author: dangit

* the allocated value is highly coupled to the rest of the object (e.g. pod
  resource allocations)
* the allocated value is always or almost always needed (i.e. most instances of
  this type will have a value)
* the schema and controller are known a priori (i.e. it's not an extension)

> * the access-control needs allow for controllers to be able to write to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* the access control needs allow for controllers to be able to write to
```
This last point would benefit from clarification. What are these access control needs? Would controllers normally not be able to write like this, unless there were special access control needs in play?

Author: Reworded.  PTAL at next push

  `status`

Consumers of such values can look at the `status` field for the "final" value.

#### Sequencing operations

Since almost everything is happening asynchronously to almost everything else,
controller implementations should take care around the ordering of operations.
For example, whether the controller updates a `status` field before or after it
actuates a change depends on what guarantees need to be made to observers of
the system.  In some cases, writing to a `status` field represents an
acknowledgement or acceptance of a spec value, and it is OK to write it before
actuation.  However, if it would be problematic for a client to observe the
`status` value before it is actuated then the controller must actuate first and

> update `status` thereafter.  In some rarer cases, controllers will need to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
update `status` afterward.  In some rarer cases, controllers will need to
```

Author: ACK

acknowledge, then actuate, then update to a "final" value.

Controllers must take care to consider how a `status` field will be handled in
the case of interrupted control loops (e.g. controller crash and restart), and

> must act idempotently and consistently.

Reviewer 5: Do we want to recommend that controllers that write `status` before actuation should have some form of Condition that indicates that the change is not yet complete, and then clear that Condition in the final `status` update?

Author: Do we have a solid body of evidence to make specific prescriptions?  I don't know what the "right" recipe is in the abstract.  Maybe we can followup with more details?

Reviewer 5: Most of my motivation here is trying to actuate these types of systems in automation (i.e. integration tests, installation).

In those situations, without a solid "it's done" signal, debugging failures becomes much harder because the orchestrator ends up needing to probe the resource to determine whether the actuation is complete. This basically ends up shredding the abstraction and introducing uncertainty between "true failures" and "didn't wait long enough" failures.

Author: Especially in layered systems, ESPECIALLY in networking, this is hard - it's not always  possible to know "it's done" without probing.   Again, I ama not sure what the prescription here should be given the need to be somewhat adaptable.

### When to use a different type

Storing allocated values in a different type is more complicated but also more
flexible.  This is most appropriate when:

* the allocated value is optional (i.e. many instances of this type will not
  have a value at all)
* the schema and controller are not known a priori (i.e. it's an extension)
* the schema is sufficiently complicated (i.e. it doesn't make sense to burden
  the main type with it)
* access-control for this type demands finer granularity than "all of status"
* the lifecycle of the allocated value is different than the lifecycle of the

>   allocation-holder

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  allocation holder
```

Author: ACK

Services and Endpoints could be considered a form of this pattern, as could

> PersistenVolumes and PersistentVolumeClaims.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PersistentVolumes and PersistentVolumeClaims.
```

When using this pattern, you must account for lifecycle of the allocated
objects (who cleans them up and when) as well as the "linkage" between them and

> the main type (often using the same-name or an object-ref field or a selector).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the main type (often using the same name, an object-ref field, or a selector).
```

Author: ACK

service type to `ExternalName` where these resources and field values no longer apply. 	

## Representing Allocated Values

Many API types include values that are allocated on behalf of the user from
some larger space (e.g. IP addresses from a range, or storage bucket names).
These allocations are usually driven by controllers asynchronously to the
user's API operations.  Sometimes the user can request a specific value and a
controller must confirm or reject that request.  There are many examples of
this in Kubernetes, and there a handful of patterns used to represent it.

The common theme among all of these is that the system should not trust users
with such fields, and must verify or otherwise confirm such requests before
using them.

Some examples:

* Service `clusterIP`: Users may request a specific IP in `spec` or will be
  allocated one (in the same `spec` field).  If a specific IP is requested, the
  apiserver will wither confirm that IP is available or, failing that, will
  reject the API operation synchronously (rare).  Consumers read the result
  from `spec`.  This is safe because the value is either valid or it is never
  stored.

> * Service `loadBalancerIP`: Users may request a specific IP in `spec` or will

Author: Mentioned in next push

  be allocated one which is reported in `status`.  If a specific IP is
  requested, the LB controller will either ensure that IP is available or
  report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result from `status`.
  This is safe because most users do not have acces to write to `status`.
* PersistentVolumeClaims: Users may request a specific PersistentVolume in
  `spec` or will be allocated one (in the same `spec` field).  If a specific PV
  is requested, the volume controller will either ensure that the volume is
  available or report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result by
  examining both the PVC and the PV.  This is more complicated than the others
  because the `spec` value is stored before being confirmed, which could lead

>   to a user accessing someone else's PV.

Author: :)

  The system cannot easily verify those IPs (by their definition, they are
  external). Consumers read the result from `spec`.  This is UNSAFE and has
  caused problems with untrusted users.

In the past, API conventions dictated that `status` fields always come from
observation, which made some of these cases more complicated than necessary.
The conventions have been updated to allow `status` to hold such allocated
values.  This is not a one-size-fits-all solution, though.

### When to use a `spec` field

New APIs should almost never do this.  Instead, they should use `status`.
PersistentVolumes might have been simpler if we had done this.

### When to use a `status` field

Storing such values in `status` is the easiest and most straight-forward
pattern.  This is appropriate when:

* the allocated value is highly coupled to the rest of the object (e.g. pod
  resource allocations)
* the allocated value is always or almost always needed (i.e. most instances of
  this type will have a value)
* the schema and controller are known a priori (i.e. it's not an extension)
* it is "safe" to allow the controller(s) to write to `status` (i.e.

>   there's low risk of them causing problems viaa other `status` fields).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  there's low risk of them causing problems via other `status` fields).
```
This makes more sense to me now. Thank you for improving it.

> Consumers of such values can look at the `status` field for the "final" value.

Author: ACK

#### Sequencing operations

Since almost everything is happening asynchronously to almost everything else,
controller implementations should take care around the ordering of operations.
For example, whether the controller updates a `status` field before or after it
actuates a change depends on what guarantees need to be made to observers of
the system.  In some cases, writing to a `status` field represents an
acknowledgement or acceptance of a `spec` value, and it is OK to write it before
actuation.  However, if it would be problematic for a client to observe the
`status` value before it is actuated then the controller must actuate first and
update `status` afterward.  In some rarer cases, controllers will need to
acknowledge, then actuate, then update to a "final" value.

Controllers must take care to consider how a `status` field will be handled in
the case of interrupted control loops (e.g. controller crash and restart), and

> must act idempotently and consistently.

Reviewer 6: Consistency is interesting when the main way controllers observe data and react is usually via an informer-fed cache. The typical pattern of reading from spec and writing to status (happens to) avoid stomping status if your observed data is stale.

Starting to both write to and read from status as an input for making decisions can lead controllers into bugs where their informer-fed cache has not yet observed their own earlier write, and they make a bad/weird decision and persist the result to status.

An example we hit recently where a controller was using status both as a place to record information and as an input for decisions was a [bug in the job controller](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105199) where it was writing completed pod uids to job status, then reading completed pod uids from job status to aggregate them into an overall success/failure count after having marked the pods as observed (to try to be resilient/idempotent).

The best mitigation for a controller is usually to use a resourceVersion precondition and react to a conflict response that indicates the view of the object you had was stale. Controllers that expect to be the only one acting on their object's status may not be accustomed to using that approach. I'd recommend highlighting (or linking to a discussion of) using resourceVersion preconditions for status update or patch requests, *especially* when using status as both an output and an input.

Author: ACK.  Will link the above issue.

> 

Reviewer 6: notes to self:
* make sure there's a topic talking about reasons to use patch instead of read-modify-update:
  * avoid touching/dropping fields you don't know about
  * avoid precondition failures on rv if some other actor touched the object
* make sure there's a topic talking about how to use rv preconditions in conjunction with patch requests
* sweep existing "controllers" (including things like the kubelet) to see how they read from status fields of their objects to see if there are other patterns to follow or traps to avoid

  apiserver will either confirm that IP is available or, failing that, will
  reject the API operation synchronously (rare).  Consumers read the result
  from `spec`.  This is safe because the value is either valid or it is never
  stored.
* Service `loadBalancerIP`: Users may request a specific IP in `spec` or will
  be allocated one which is reported in `status`.  If a specific IP is
  requested, the LB controller will either ensure that IP is available or
  report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result from `status`.
  This is safe because most users do not have acces to write to `status`.
* PersistentVolumeClaims: Users may request a specific PersistentVolume in
  `spec` or will be allocated one (in the same `spec` field).  If a specific PV
  is requested, the volume controller will either ensure that the volume is
  available or report failure asynchronously.  Consumers read the result by
  examining both the PVC and the PV.  This is more complicated than the others
  because the `spec` value is stored before being confirmed, which could
  (hypothetically, thanks to extra checking) lead to a user accessing someone
  else's PV.

> * VolumeSnapshots: Users may request f particular source be snaphotted in `spec`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* VolumeSnapshots: Users may request a particular source be snapshotted in `spec`.
```

Reviewer 6: unless sig-storage is working on a new project I don't know about...

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/980082/148844207-85287b82-c2de-4a90-b797-25e2498fb14a.png)
